>> Come into a nice
upright seated posture.
For this meditation, we're going
to begin with the breathwork
technique known as Chandra
Bhedana Pranayama or lunar
channel breathing.
I'm going to be mirroring you.
So we're going to take our
left hand into Chin Mudra,
index finger and thumb
together palm down,
and we going to take our right
hand into Vishnu Mudra, index
finger, middle finger
into the pad of the palm,
and we're just going
to be alternating
inhaling through
your left nostril
and then exhaling
through the right.
Inhaling left, exhaling right.
And so let's do that one time.
So go ahead and block right.
Inhale through your left
for a five count, block,
and then we're going
to exhale right.
OK.
So feel free to join me with
your eyes open or closed.
But I invite you to do
this with your eyes closed.
So let's go ahead and close
your eyes, softening the belly,
and slowly inhaling abdomen out.
Exhale completely.
Empty the lungs,
draw the navel in.
And I want you to pause with
the breath out for a moment.
And then slowly begin to
inhale, belly expanding out.
Exhale, draw the navel in.
Completely empty your lungs.
And I want you to pause with
the breath out for a moment.
And then beginning your
inhalation softly, last one.
Inhale, belly expands out.
Exhale, draw the navel in,
completely emptying the lungs.
Pause for a moment
with the breath out.
And we're going to go ahead
and block the right nostril
with your thumb.
Inhale through the left
for a count of five,
four, block left,
exhale right, five.
Inhale left five.
Block left.
Exhale right five.
Block right.
Inhale left.
Block left, exhale right.
Block right, inhale left.
Block right.
Inhale left.
Block left, exhale right.
We're going to do three
more rounds on your own.
Block right.
Begin.
Inhale left.
Beginning round two.
Beginning round three.
Exhale everything out
of the right nostril.
Eyes closed.
Release.
Left hand down, index
finger and thumb touching,
palms facing down.
Soften your abdomen.
And I want you to slow
your breathing down
to about a quarter of
your normal breath.
And bring your attention to
the upper palate of the mouth
and down towards the
back of the throat.
I want you to feel the
sensation of the breath
rubbing, coming in and
out through the nostrils,
rubbing in this area, back
of the upper throat at about
a quarter of your normal
breath, visualizing
a brightening there, feeling the
subtle vibration of the breath.
It is a very subtle
Ujjayi breathing.
You can feel the
sensation rubbing
against the upper palate and
back of the upper throat.
You may begin to feel a
certain fuzziness there.
That's perfect.
And if not, that's OK too.
Finding yourself, your
body, in a restful state,
continuing with that
breath, hearing,
feeling the vibration running
against the upper palate, back
of the upper throat.
And now we'll take
Kechari Mudra.
Take the tip of your
tongue up the palate
and slide it back until
you find a rough patch.
Now I want you to back
off and bring it back
to the very last part
of the smooth palate,
very gently touching the
tip of your tongue there.
No straining.
And next take your right hand
to the very top of your head.
Touch the top of
your head, the crown,
tip of the tongue to
the roof of the mouth,
hand's in the very
top crown of the head.
Go inside.
Find the relationship between
the tip of your tongue
at the roof of the mouth
and your fingertips
at the top of the head.
Draw a line between
the two points.
And now find the center.
Find the center.
Target the center,
visualizing a full moon there.
And once you've gotten it, you
can release the hand back down,
keeping your internal gaze
floating on the white moon
in the center of your brain.
This is the seat of your mind.
It is at the very center
of your mind and thoughts.
Now with your
attention there, I'd
like you to bring in a
contemplative thought
with the understanding
that you are not the mind.
You are the witness ever
present in the background
of your thoughts, emotions,
internal experiences
with this stillness, this ever
present awareness resting,
observant, silent witness
in the background.
Visualize the white moon in
the center of your brain.
And once again bringing
in the contemplation.
I am not the mind.
I am the ever present
witness, unchanging, still.
We'll continue with this
observation of the moon.
And if any random thoughts
begin to lead you astray,
come back to the
witnessing of the moon
and the inner contemplation.
I am not the mind.
I am the silent witness
who observes all thoughts
and emotions.
Take a slow breath in through
the nostrils, part the lips,
and exhale softly out the mouth.
Release the tongue from
the roof of your mouth
and slowly bring
the hands together
at the heart in what's
called Anjali Mudra,
leaving a small space
between the palms.
And even before
you open your eyes,
I'd like you to once
again internally repeat
the contemplation.
I am not the mind, but I am
the silent witness observing
in the background of things.
And even as you now open the
eyes halfway into the hands,
slowly bringing that same
level of consciousness
with you now into the
awakened outside world,
see if you can take this
idea with you into your day.